Course,Description
Introduction to Social Psychology PSYC10711,"Overview: This unit provides an introduction to Social Psychology. The course covers a series of fundamental topics in this area, including: interpersonal relationships, prejudice, stereotypes and discrimination, the social self, social influence and cross-cultural psychology. To reflect the breadth and depth of social psychological research currently carried out in the UK and worldwide, this course draws upon studies across different approaches and traditions, highlighting current research and classic studies that illuminate the nature of social thinking and behaviour.This is a compulsory Year 1 unit for the BSc Psychology programme, falling within the Psychology in Society theme. It provides a foundation for further study in Social Psychology at Levels 5 and 6. Aims: Offer an introduction to the discipline of Social Psychology, and provide students with knowledge of central topics and key areas of research inquiry in this field. Teaching and learning methods: This unit will be taught via lectures and empirical work lab classes. Course content, lab materials, supplementary reading and resources and a monitored discussion board will be available via the unit Blackboard site. Knowledge and understanding: Understand how different theoretical perspectives from social psychology provide competing explanations of social behaviour (i.e., interpersonal conflict and violence, relationship formation, the impact of culture on social behaviour) Intellectual skills: Interpret research findings in key social psychological topicsApply social psychological theories to understand contemporary social issues and real-world behaviourObjectively interpret the results of analyses in the context of research design Practical skills: Carry out a piece of practical social psychology, with guidanceWrite an introduction and method section in a clear and coherent report format and in accordance with APA Transferable skills and personal qualities: Question and reflect on obstacles to diversity, tolerance and social inclusion as experienced in their personal and future professionalPresent information, ideas and arguments in written form with due regard to the target audience and discipline conventions Assessment methods: Half Lab Report (Introduction and Method) - 70%MCQ Exam 30% Recommended reading: Gilovich et al., Social Psychology (2023).This book is available electronically through the university library website. Study hours: Scheduled activity hours     Lectures 11   Practical classes & workshops 6   Seminars 3"
Introduction to Developmental Psychology PSYC10211,"Overview: In this unit, we discover the developmental processes that have resulted in the unique individuals who are enrolled on this unit.Students will be introduced to the study of development as a core discipline within psychology. The first thing we will do is to discuss why we should study development, and how we should study development -- because we cannot necessarily ask young children questions or get their informed consent to take part in experiments, we have to be creative and think of new ways to investigate their understanding and capabilities.From there, we move on to present prominent theories of development (e.g. Piaget, and Socio-cultural approaches) and why theories of how we develop are so important.We then lead into overviews of the current state of the fields of perceptual, motor, cognitive, biological, social, and emotional development in children.The course is a compulsory Level 4 course unit for the BSc (Hons) Psychology programme, falling within the Evolution and Development theme. It provides a foundation for further study in Developmental Psychology at Levels 5 and 6. Aims: Provide students with an overview of human development from infancy to late childhood Teaching and learning methods: This unit adopts a blended learning approach comprising on-demand, self-paced materials (estimated study time: 30-60 mins per week) for students to study in advance of 60 minute in-person large-group session. There will also be in-person empirical lab workshops which run in Weeks 1-5.The precise set-up may vary week-to-week and in response to ongoing student feedback, but is anticipated that on-demand materials will comprise a mix of bespoke pre recorded video materials from staff, reading, activities, and quizzes to check for understanding.The weekly large-group sessions will build on the self-paced materials -- students delve into these topics in more depth with activities such as videos, examples, quizzes - and include some more ""traditional"" lecture delivery.In Week 1-4, students will have a 2-hour lab workshop which will include a range of resources including live-taught segments, pre-prepared materials, videos, activities, and discussions. Students will also work together in small groups to complete activities based on the lab content. In Week 5, there will be an optional drop-in session to support students with preparing their coursework assignment.Lecture content, on-demand materials, supplementary reading, optional resources and a monitored discussion board for students to ask questions will be available via the unit Blackboard site.During the course, practice Multiple Choice Questions will be provided to enable students to test their knowledge of course content, helping to reinforce the learning of the material, and giving practice for the end of semester exam. Knowledge and understanding: Appreciate the importance of the study of development to the understanding of human behaviourRead and evaluate current research literatureRecognise the limitations imposed by particular design decisions Understand how knowledge accumulates in developmental psychologyOn successful completion of this unit students will:Understand the importance of understanding how humans develop - in their cultural context - in order to fully understand human behaviourUnderstand theories of development - and their usefulness in making novel predictions - with special reference to constructivist and socio-cognitive approachesAppreciate the methodology used to study child development, and how research methodologies progress to allow a more complete understanding of the capabilities of the childHave a good understanding of cognitive development - including perceptual and motor development - in childhood and how this underpins successful adult behaviourUnderstand the child as a social being, with particular reference to social and emotional development, attachment relationships, and the child's understanding of themselves in their environment Intellectual skills: Compare theoretical predictions and empirical findings in the field of developmentObjectively interpret the results of analyses in the context of the research design Practical skills: Evaluate commonly used methodology in developmental psychology Transferable skills and personal qualities: Present information, ideas and arguments in written formSustain and develop cogent and coherent arguments Assessment methods: MCQ exam       50 questions              50%Research Review     2 pages             50% Recommended reading: Seigler, R., DeLoache, J., Eisenberg, N., & Saffran, J. (2017). How Children Develop (5th international edition). New York: Worth Study hours: Scheduled activity hours     Lectures 11   Seminars 10"
Introduction to Cognition PSYC10421,"Overview: In this unit, we delve into the secrets of the human mind, and take a look at how it all works (and what happens when it goes wrong).We begin with an overview of cognitive psychology, with a focus on its methods and approaches to the scientific study of human cognition before moving on to specific aspects of cognition – while integrating cutting-edge research – in the areas of attention, memory and language.The Attention topic will include discussion of the classic theories of attention including Broadbent’s bottleneck theory and Treisman’s attenuation theory. We will also explore attention in the real world, and what happens when attention goes wrong.Moving on to Memory, we will introduce evidence for the multi-store model of memory, then show how subsequent research has led to a more elaborate model of working memory and to the multiple-systems theory of long-term memory.And finally we turn to focus on that ability which most sets humans apart from other species – Language. We will cover word recognition and how people read (including eye movements during reading), an overview of sentence and discourse processing, and will introduce models of speech processing and production.This is a compulsory Level 4 unit for the Cognitive Neuroscience & Psychology programme, falling within the Mind & Brain theme. It provides a foundation for further study of units in the Mind & Brain theme at levels 5 and 6. Aims: Provide students with an introduction to human cognition. This unit introduces students to cognitive psychology and to a number of core components of cognition including attention, learning, memory, and language. Teaching and learning methods: This unit adopts a blended learning approach. The precise set-up may vary week-to-week and in response to ongoing student feedback, there will typically be on-demand, self-paced materials (estimated study time: up to 60 mins per week) for students to study in advance of 60 minute in-person large-group session.On-demand materials will comprise a mix of bespoke pre-recorded video materials from staff, reading, activities, and quizzes to check for understanding. The weekly in-person sessions will build on the self-paced materials -- students delve into these topics in more depth with activities such as live demonstrations of the phenomena being studied, exercises, reading relevant research papers, and discussions -- and include some more “traditional” lecture delivery.Lecture content, on-demand materials, supplementary reading, optional resources and a monitored discussion board for students to ask questions will be available via the unit Blackboard site. During the course, practice Multiple Choice Questions will be provided to enable students to test their knowledge of course content, helping to reinforce the learning of the material, and giving practice for the end of semester exam.The assignment information session will take place online, delivered by the unit lead, and will provide a dedicated introduction to the coursework assessment, including discussion of the poster assignment and marking criteria. Knowledge and understanding: Appreciate the importance of the study of cognition for the understanding of human psychology, and the contribution of Cognition research to many other branches of Psychology.On successful completion of this unit students will:Appreciate the importance of understanding cognition, and the crucial role of Cognition in all understanding all aspects of the human mind and behaviourDescribe, understand, and evaluate several core-elements of Cognition including Attention, Memory, and LanguageUnderstand cornerstone theories of Cognition, and how these have emerged and evolved from research findingsBegin to read and evaluate research literature central to the Cognition and Cognitive Psychology, and effectively assimilate and communicate these findings to othersGain insight into current world-leading Cognition research at the University of Manchester Intellectual skills: Describe, understand and think critically about models and theories of attention, memory, and language (especially in the light of recent empirical findings) Practical skills: Apply knowledge and understanding of cognition to explain real-world phenomenaPlan, research and produce an essay on a topic in the area of cognition research and findings Transferable skills and personal qualities: Students will develop their skills in:Synthesising informationSummarising theories and evidenceCritical thinkingEvaluating researchWorking and discussing topics in small groupsPresent a clearly constructed argument to evaluate a topic in a written essay Assessment methods: MCQ exam (75 questions) - 100% Recommended reading: Eysenck, M. W. & Keane, M. T. (2015). Cognitive Psychology: A student’s handbook (7th ed.). East Sussex: Taylor & Francis.N.B. The 6th edition (2010) of this textbook is also appropriate and available as an e-book via the University of Manchester library Study hours: Scheduled activity hours     Lectures 12   Tutorials 1"
Brain & Behaviour PSYC11212,"Overview: Basic principles of neuroanatomy, neurophysiology, and neurochemistry will be discussed to develop an understanding of how these biological factors underlie human brain function. Topics will include biological basis of emotion, motivation, stress, sleep, autistic, ADHD and substance abuse disorders. Students will become familiar with multidisciplinary methods of investigation through use of behavioural, computational, neuropsychological and neuroimaging tools.This is a compulsory Year 1 unit for the BSc Psychology programme, falling within the Mind & Brain theme. It provides a foundation for further study of units in the Mind & Brain theme at levels 5 and 6. Aims: Introduce students to the structure and function of the brain as it affects behaviour. It will focus on how human and animal research; the effects of brain injury and the latest neuroimaging techniques can be used to explain the brain processes that underpin behaviour and cognition. Teaching and learning methods: Course unit content will be delivered in twelve 60 minute lectures. This material will be supported with four 1 hour seminars. Students requiring further support will be able to attend a drop-in session. Lecture content, supplementary reading and resources and a monitored discussion board will be available via the unit Blackboard site. During the course, practice Multiple Choice and Short Answer Questions will be provided, enabling students to test their knowledge of course content, helping to reinforce the learning of the material, and giving practice for the end of year exam. Knowledge and understanding: Develop a sound understanding of biological psychologyGain a working knowledge of basic brain terminology and functioningUnderstand how the brain is able to process complex information and respond accordinglyHave an appreciation of the methods used to study the brain Intellectual skills: Evaluate theories developed to explain how the brain worksConsider research and scholarship in selected core topics in biological psychology Practical skills: Use a range of sources (library, internet, electronic databases) to gather informationLearn to communicate information in a concise fashion, develop arguments and adopt appropriate analysis tools and use them effectivelyReview and assimilate empirical evidence from a range of scientific disciplines (e.g. biology, psychology and neuroscience)Articulate scientific knowledge in a clear and concise form Transferable skills and personal qualities: Independently gather and select the most relevant information from a body of work through online and library sourcesPresent concise and persuasive argumentsDevelop skills in critical thinking Assessment methods: 75 MCQ's - 90 minutes - 100% Recommended reading: Carlson, N.R. (2015). Foundations of behavioural neuroscience (9th ed.). East Sussex: Taylor & Francis.N.B. Students will be given a code to access an electronic version of this textbook through Kortext Study hours: Scheduled activity hours     Lectures 12   Seminars 4   Tutorials 3"
Lifespan & Ageing PSYC10311,"Overview: The course material will be delivered via live lectures (with associated e-learning resources) and other recorded content (such as interviews with researchers & clinicians). The course covers each major lifespan stage (adolescence and early, middle and late adulthood) and is supported with a bespoke textbook with chapters relating to each of the four stages. At every stage, biological, cognitive, social and individual difference approaches to change and development will be covered. The opening lecture introduces students to research methodology in lifespan research to equip them with the background knowledge to appreciate how researchers acquire knowledge about lifespan development. The first five lectures consider biological and cognitive development, the following five lectures consider social factors affecting development at different life stages.This is a compulsory Level 4 unit for the BSc Psychology programme, falling within the Evolution and Development theme. It provides a foundation for further study of units in the Evolution and Development theme at levels 5 and 6. Aims: Provide students with an overview of human development from adolescence to late adulthood. Introduce students to psychological approaches to development throughout the lifespan.Draw upon cognitive, biological, social and individual differences psychology research to provide students with an overview of factors relating to lifespan and ageing.Familiarise students with the major theories of human psychological development, emphasising the fundamentally interactive nature of psychological processes.Introduce students to the breadth of research methods that are used to understand development through the lifespan, including longitudinal, cross-sectional and cross-cultural studies. Teaching and learning methods: This course is delivered via live lectures, with associated recorded content, such as interviews with clinicians and leading researchers. There will also be four seminars, with opportunities for interactions with Teaching Assistants. Students will review the relevant chapters of the textbook in preparation and will apply their knowledge to a series of questions and case studies to consider how psychological research can be applied to real-world lifespan issues (e.g. cultural influences on outcomes during ageing). E-learning provision: supplementary reading and resources, and a monitored discussion board will be provided via Blackboard. Knowledge and understanding: Appreciate the importance of the study of lifespan development and change to the understanding of human behaviourDevelop an understanding of the key approaches to lifespan developmentDemonstrate knowledge of cognitive, biological, social and health psychological approaches to human development beyond childhood Intellectual skills: Appreciate the contributions of different areas of psychological research to adult development. Integrate findings from different fields of research to understand lifespan developmentAbility to summarise the evidence base for findings from the main approaches to development (biological, cognitive, social, health) Practical skills: Apply knowledge to real world cases in the field of human development Transferable skills and personal qualities: Students will have the opportunity to develop their skills in:Synthesising information; summarising theories and evidenceCritical thinkingEvaluating researchWorking in groupsCommunicating effectively both orally and in writingPresenting concise and persuasive arguments Assessment methods: Essay worth 100% Study hours: Scheduled activity hours     Lectures 15   Seminars 4"
